Update basic prot-prot server tuto (#773)
haddocking/haddocking.github.io: education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-protein-basic/index.md

<hr>
## Inspecting and preparing E2A for docking

We will now inspect the E2A structure. For this start PyMOL and in the command line window of PyMOL (indicated by PyMOL>) type:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
fetch 1F3G<br>
show cartoon<br>
hide lines<br>
</a>

You should see a cartoon representation of the protein. 
It is known from the literature that a phosphate group interacts and can form a covalent bond with the side chain of a histidine residue. 
Let us first check whether histidine residues are present in this structure:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
show sticks, resn HIS<br>
</a>

The histidine side chains are now displayed in stick representation. You can zoom in on the histidines using:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">zoom resn HIS</a>

To return to the full view of the structure, type:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">zoom vis</a>

This structure has two histidines present. How about phosphate group? 

<a class="prompt prompt-question">Is there a phosphate group present in this structure?</a>

> *Hint* : you can select phosphate atoms with the following command and check how many atoms are in this selection: 

Reviewer: Not found of the *check*
```suggestion
*Hint* : you can select phosphate atoms with the following command and read from the log how many atoms are in this selection: 
```

<a class="prompt prompt-question">Do they form a contiguous surface?</a>

The answer to the last question should be **no**: we can observe residue in the center of the patch that do not seem significantly affected while still being in the middle of the defined interface. This is the reason why in HADDOCK we also define "*passive*" residues that correspond to surface neighbors of active residues. These can be selected manually, or more conveniently you can let the HADDOCK server do it for you (see [Setting up the docking run](#setting-up-the-docking-run) below).

As final step save the molecule as a new PDB file which we will call: *e2a_1F3G.pdb*<br>
For this in the PyMOL menu on top select:
<a class="prompt prompt-info">File -> Export molecule...</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">Click on the save button</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">Select as ouptut format PDB (*.pdb *.pdb.gz)</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">Name your file *e2a_1F3G.pdb* and note its location</a>

Another way to save the structure as a PDB file is via the command:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">save e2a_1F3G.pdb, 1F3G</a>

> The file will be written to the current working directory: if PyMOL was launched from a terminal, it will be saved in the directory from which PyMOL was started; if PyMOL was opened manually (e.g., via the graphical interface), it is typically saved in your home directory.

Reviewer: What about a list ?
```suggestion
The file will be written to the current working directory:
- if PyMOL was launched from a terminal, it will be saved in the directory from which PyMOL was started
- if PyMOL was opened manually (e.g., via the graphical interface), it is typically saved in your home directory.
```

## Inspecting and preparing HPR for docking

We will now inspect the HPR structure. For this start PyMOL and in the command line window of PyMOL type:

<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
fetch 1HDN<br>
show cartoon<br>
hide lines<br>
</a>

> Since this is an NMR structure it does not contain any water molecules and we don't need to remove them.

Reviewer 2: Why remove this? It is relevant since we do remove the water for the first molecule

Author: I did remove it in favour of adding a question just below (line 209):
`<a class="prompt prompt-question">Are there any irrelevant (for the docking) molecules present in this structure?</a>
`

I can modify it to be more expisit: 
`<a class="prompt prompt-question">Are there any irrelevant (for the docking) molecules present in this structure, e.g. water molecules?</a>
`

<a class="prompt prompt-question">Do they form a contiguous surface?</a>

You may have noticed that the set of PyMOL commands above took slightly longer to execute compared to the similar set of commands for E2A.
This is because 1HDN is an NMR structure. Unlike X-ray structures, NMR entries contain an ensemble of models - in this case, we have 30 different conformers.

You can display all 30 conformers, looped in succession, using:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol"> mplay </a>
To stop the playback:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol"> mstop </a>

HADDOCK is able to handle such ensembles by using each conformer in turn as a starting point for docking. 
We generally recommend limiting the number of conformers used. 
Otherwise, the number of possible combinations between the input molecules can quickly escalate (i.e. become very large).
For example, if both partners contain 10 conformers, this results in 100 possible starting combinations. If 1000 rigid-body models are generated (see [HADDOCK general concepts](#haddock-general-concepts) above), each combination would then be sampled only 10 times!

> In case if limiting number of input conformers is an unreasonable choice, it is possible to increase the number of models generated in the rigid-body docking stage (it0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If limiting the number of input conformers is an unreasonable choice, it is possible to increase the number of models generated in the rigid-body docking stage (it0).
```

However, this requires elevated permissions level on the HADDOCK 2.4 server, which you can request via "[User Dashboard](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/dashboard){:target="_blank"}". 

> Now let's display all models of this NMR ensemble simultaneously in ribbon representation. 

Reviewer: Before the word cartoon was used, I guess it is better to keep it. Also in line with PyMOL naming
```suggestion
Now let's display all models of this NMR ensemble simultaneously as cartoon representation. 
```

Reviewer 2: I think we are rather showing the models as ribbon and not cartoon - easier to see the differences between the conformations

Reviewer 2: The command below explicitly uses the ribbon representation which is basically a CA trace of the backbone.

Author: Yes, it's ribbon on purpose - much easier to see variety given by side chain

This representation is handy for visualizing backbone conformation:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
hide all<br>
show ribbon<br>
set all_states, on<br>
</a>

You should now be seeing the 30 conformers present in this NMR structure.

> It may appear that conformations are fairly conserved across all 30 models, but let us look at the side chains of the active residues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first, it may appear that conformations are fairly conserved across all 30 models, but let us look at the side chains of the active residues:
```

<img src="/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-protein-basic/hpr-ensemble.png">
</figure>

You should now be able to observe the range of conformational space sampled by these surface side chains. 

> Some residues clearly adopt a wide variety of conformations, and one of these might lead to much better docking results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some residues clearly adopt a wide variety of conformations, and one of these might resemble the bound conformation, hence leading to much better docking results.
```

<hr>
## Adding a phosphate group

Since the biological function of this complex is to transfer a phosphate group from one protein to another via histidine side chains, it is important that the phosphate group participates in the docking.
Yet both the structures we prepared and saved do not currently contain any phosphate group.

As a reminder (see [Introduction](#introduction) above), in bacteria the phosphate group is transferred between histidine residues of the interacting proteins.
From the literature it is known that in E2A histidine 90 is involved in this transfer.
We can include phosphate group into the docking by modifying this canonical histidine into a phosphorylated histidine, i.e. histidine with covalently attached phosphate group.

HADDOCK supports a number of modified amino acids, which can be found at: [https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/library](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/library){:target="_blank"}.

<a class="prompt prompt-question">Check the list of supported modified amino acids. What is the proper residue name for a phosphorylated histidine in HADDOCK?</a>

> To use a modified amino acid in HADDOCK, it is sufficient to edit the PDB file and change the residue name of the corresponding residue. There is no need to add or delete atoms - HADDOCK will take care of this automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a modified amino acid in HADDOCK, it is sufficient to edit the PDB file and change the residue name of the corresponding residue. There is no need to add or delete atoms - HADDOCK will take care of building the missing atoms automatically while generating the topology of the system.
```

To introduce this modification:

> <a class="prompt prompt-info">Open the PDB file *e2a_1F3G.pdb* in your favorite text editor</a>

Reviewer: Do we want to specify editors not to use ?
Or typical editors to use

Author: I don't think so. Also I cannot think of an editor that can open pdb format by default, but at the same time can't maintain pdb spacing

Reviewer 3: notepad++ is a windows friendly one that can do that

> <a class="prompt prompt-info">Find histidine with residue sequence number equal to 90</a> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a class="prompt prompt-info">Find the histidine with residue number 90</a> 
```

Author: To me "residue number" is also way more habitual, but I would keep "residue sequence number", as it is in documentation linked bellow in the text. I hope this way very unexperienced users won't get confused.

And experiences users gonna understand as is

> Remember that residue sequence number is the second integer value in the line starting with "ATOM". Check [this link](https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/UsersGuide/tutorials/pdbintro.html){:target="_blank"} for more info.

Reviewer: proposing a simpler link
```suggestion
Remember that residue sequence number is the second integer value in the coordinate lines (starting with "ATOM" or "HETATM"). Check [this link](https://cupnet.net/pdb-format/){:target="_blank"} for more info.
```

<a class="prompt prompt-info">Change this residue name to NEP</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">Save the file under a new name, e.g. *e2aP_1F3G.pdb*</a>

**_Note_** that the same procedure can also be used to introduce mutations in an input protein structure.

<hr>
## Setting up the docking run

#### Registration / Login

In order to use HADDOCK web server, you need to navigate to [wenmr portal](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/auth/){:target="_blank"} and login. 
After successful validation of credentials, scroll down to "Services", locate **HADDOCK v2.4** and click on "Go to service". Or use this link: [https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/){:target="_blank"}.

#### HADDOCK submission: Input data

> Locate "[Submit a new job](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/submit/1){:target="_blank"}" button. Note that you are now in "Input data" tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locate and click on the "[Submit a new job](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/submit/1){:target="_blank"}" button. Note that you are now in "Input data" tab.
```

In this stage of the submission process we will upload the structures we previously prepared with PyMOL.

* **Step1:** In the field "Job name", define a name for your docking run, e.g. *E2A-HPR*.

> * **Step2:** In the field "Number of molecules", select the number of molecules to dock, in this case 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Step2:** In the field "Number of molecules", select the number of molecules to dock, in this case 2, which is the default value.
```

PDB structure to submit -> Browse and select *e2aP_1F3G.pdb* (the file you edited to modify the histidine)
</a>

Leave all other options to their default values. 

> **_Note_** that you can fold and unfold the "Molecule 1 - input" section by clicking on the ▼ icon. This works for any section and subsection of HADDOCK server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**_Note_** that you can fold and unfold the "Molecule 1 - input" section by clicking on the ▼ icon. This works for any section and subsection on the HADDOCK2.4 server.
```

Which chain to be used? -> All (for this particular case)
</a>
<a class="prompt prompt-info">
PDB structure to submit -> Browse and select *hpr-ensemble.pdb* (the ensemble of NMR conformations you saved)
</a>

**_Note_** that HADDOCK server will automatically adjust several docking parameters based on the field "What kind of molecule are you docking?". 

* **Step 5:** Click on the "Next" button at the bottom left of the interface. 

This will upload the structures to the HADDOCK webserver where they will be processed and validated (checked for formatting errors). The server makes use of [Molprobity](http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu/){:target="_blank"} to check side chain conformations, eventually swap them (e.g. for asparagines) and define the protonation state of histidine residues.

#### HADDOCK submission: Input parameters

If processing and validation of the input files run without errors, you will be brought to the "Input parameters" tab. In case any issues had occurred - you will remain in the "Input data" tab and the error message will be shown either on top of the page or in the subsection for one of the molecules. 

##### Definition of restraints

> In this tab, we will define distance restraints by specify active residues for each molecule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tab, we will define distance restraints by specifying active residues for each molecule.
```

* **Step 10:** Click on the "Submit" button at the bottom left of the interface.

##### Your job has been successfully processed!

Upon submission you will be presented with a web page with a message "Your job has been successfully processed!". This page allows you to track the execution of the run and also download "parameter file".

At first your job will have status "Processed", then "Queued", and eventually it will change to "Running" and you will see progress bar moving along each stage. 

<figure align="center">
<img src="/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-protein-basic/running.png" width="60%">
</figure>

This run will take between 30 minutes to several hours - depending on the load of the server. You will be notified by email once your job has been completed. The results will remain accessible for a week. 

> You do not have to keep this page open, all resent jobs can be accessed via the "[Workspace](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/workspace){:target="_blank"}" button in the navigation bar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You do not have to keep this page open, all recent jobs can be accessed via the "[Workspace](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/workspace){:target="_blank"}" button in the navigation bar.
```

<hr>
## Analysing the results

Once your run has completed (you will also be notified by email about it) you will be presented with a result page showing the cluster statistics and graphical representation of the run. 

> An example output page for E2A-HPR docking can be found [here](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/run/4242424242/195967-E2A-HPR){:target="_blank"} - just in case you don't want to wait for the results of your docking run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example output page for E2A-HPR docking can be found [here](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/run/4242424242/195967-E2A-HPR){:target="_blank"} - just in case you don't want to wait for the results of your own docking run.
```

> An example output page for E2A-HPR docking can be found [here](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/run/4242424242/195967-E2A-HPR){:target="_blank"} - just in case you don't want to wait for the results of your docking run.

Reviewer 3: Is this related to this? https://github.com/haddocking/csbportal/issues/1496

Author: Yes!

<figure align="center">
<img src="/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-protein-basic/HADDOCK-result-page.png">
</figure>

> <a class="prompt prompt-question">Inspect the result page. How many clusters have been generated?</a>

Reviewer: At that stage, do we want to make a description of the different parts available on the page ?

Author: I'd say with this prompt we're encouraging users to skim over the page as a whole. And then more descriptions are provided bit later in text

For this run, 80% of 200 models have been clustered, meaning that run has converged. If only a small percentage on models have been clustered it might indicate, among the others, insufficient sampling with respect to the number of input conformers or that restraints are too diverse.

HADDOCK clusters are named according to the number of models they contain, e.g. the largest cluster is always labeled "Cluster 1", the second-largest "Cluster 2", and so on. 
Clusters are then ordered by their average HADDOCK score. As a result, it is not extremely unusual to see, for example, "Cluster 3" ranked above "Cluster 2".
For each cluster, the average and standard deviation of the HADDOCK score and other associated metrics are reported. These statistics are calculated using only the four lowest-scoring models within each cluster.
The score for each model is calculated as:
<pre>
      HADDOCK_score = 1.0 * E_vdw + 0.2 * E_elec + 1.0 * E_desol + 0.1 * E_air,
</pre>

> where *E_vdw* is the intermolecular van der Waals energy, *E_elec* is the intermolecular electrostatic energy, *E_desol* represents an empirical desolvation energy term adapted from Fernandez-Recio *et al.* J. Mol. Biol. 2004, and *E_air* is a penalty for violation of the restraints. 

Reviewer: what about adding a link to the publication itself ?
```suggestion
where *E_vdw* is the intermolecular van der Waals energy, *E_elec* is the intermolecular electrostatic energy, *E_desol* represents an empirical desolvation energy term adapted from (Fernandez-Recio *et al.* J. Mol. Biol. 2004)[https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022283603013755], and *E_air* is a penalty for violation of the restraints. 
```

**_Note_** that the type of calculations performed by HADDOCK does have some chaotic nature, meaning that you will only get exactly the same results if you are running on the same hardware, operating system and using the same executable. The HADDOCK server makes use of [EGI](https://www.egi.eu)/[EOSC](https://www.eosc-hub.eu){:target="_blank"} high throughput computing (HTC) resources to distribute the jobs over a wide grid of computers worldwide. As such, your results might look slightly different from what is presented in the [example output page](https://wenmr.science.uu.nl/haddock2.4/run/4242424242/E2A-HPR){:target="_blank"}, which was performed on our local cluster. Small differences in scores are to be expected, but the overall picture should be consistent.

<hr>
## Visualisation

> HADDOCK server integrates the NGL viewer which allows you to quickly visualize a specific structure among clustered. For that click on the "eye" icon next to a structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HADDOCK server integrates the NGL viewer which allows you to quickly visualize a specific structure among clustered ones. For that click on the "eye" icon next to a structure.
```

<img src="/education/HADDOCK24/HADDOCK24-protein-protein-basic/phosphorylated-histidine.png">
</figure>

Zoom back to all visible molecules with:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
zoom vis<br>
</a>

Now inspect each cluster in turn and check if histidine 90 of E2A is in close proximity to another histidine of HPR.

> <a class="prompt prompt-question">Based on this analysis, which cluster fits biological information the mos does satisfy best the biological information? Is this cluster also the best ranked one?</a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a class="prompt prompt-question">Based on this analysis, which cluster best satisfies the biological information?>
<a class="prompt prompt-question">Is this cluster also the best ranked one?</a>
```

<hr>
## Comparison with the reference structure

As explained in the introduction, the structure of the native complex has been determined by NMR (PDB ID [1GGR](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/entry/pdb/1ggr){:target="_blank"}) using a combination of intermolecular NOEs and dipolar coupling restraints. We will now compare the docking models with this structure.

If you still have all cluster representative open in PyMOL you can proceed with the following analysis, otherwise load again each cluster representatives as described above. Then, fetch the reference complex and colour its chains:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
fetch 1GGR<br>
show cartoon<br>
color yellow, 1GGR and chain A<br>
color orange, 1GGR and chain B<br>
</a>

The numbering of chain B in this structure is different from the HPR numbering in the structure we used: it starts at 301 while in our models chain B starts at 1. We can shift the residue numbering by 300 using the following command:
<a class="prompt prompt-pymol">
alter (chain B and 1GGR), resv -=300<br>
</a>

> This shift is critical for the RMDS calculation described below!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This shift is critical for appropriate residue mapping when performing the RMDS calculation described below!
```
